README.md, before:

# Pico_Template (v1.5.0)
An MDK template for Raspberry Pi Pico

- Compiler: Arm Compiler 6.15 and above (Using non-intrusive wrapper to support pico-sdk which is written in GCC)
- ***It works as you wanted!***
- Compatible with CMSIS 5.7.0 and CMSIS 5.8.0
- Verified with Arm Compiler 6.15 and above.
- Provide users an option to use the ***stdio*** solution from ***pico-sdk (by default)*** or retarget the ***stdin/stdout*** to a user specified location directly. (See note in ***env_wrapper.c***).
- **Support the latest pico-sdk (v1.3.0)**
- Support Debug in MDK
  - [Using CMSIS-DAP](https://github.com/majbthrd/pico-debug) (Validated in MDK and **highly recommended**)
- Add dedicated project configurations for:
  - [**AC6-flash**] Running code in Flash (XIP)
  - [**AC6-RunInSRAM**] Running code in SRAM (code is still stored in FLASH)
  - [**AC6-DebugInSRAM**] "no_flash" mode in the original pico-sdk. It is suitable for MDK debug.
  - [**AC6-DebugInSRAM-printf**] same as [**AC6-DebugInSRAM**] but retargeting printf to 'Debug (printf) Viewer' inside MDK.




# How to Use

## 1. Get the Pico_Template

I assume that you have the MDK installed on your PC. Please clone the Pico_Template with following command line:

```
mkdir pico-mdk
cd pico-mdk

git clone https://github.com/GorgonMeducer/Pico_Template .

git submodule update --remote --init
```

Instead of using git clone, if you download a release package, then you have to download the [pico-sdk](https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk) and [perf_counter](https://github.com/GorgonMeducer/perf_counter) manually and put them into the corresponding folder:

| submodules   | URL                                           | Directory                     |
| ------------ | --------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| pico-sdk     | https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk       | ROOT\Pico-sdk\                |
| perf_counter | https://github.com/GorgonMeducer/perf_counter | ROOT\project\mdk\perf_counter |





## 2. Use the Template

The MDK project could be found in the path "ROOT\project\mdk". I assume you know how to use MDK for normal compilation. 

### 2.1 How to set the Stack and Heap size

Usually, people want to adjust the size of stack and heap, and it is very easy in this template. Please find the file "RP2040.sct" in the same MDK project directory. Find the macro ***STACK_0_SIZE*** for stack and ***HEAP_0_SIZE*** for the heap.  



```
#define STACK_0_SIZE        (1024*4)
#define STACK_1_SIZE        (1024*1)

#define HEAP_0_SIZE         (1024*32)
#define HEAP_1_SIZE         (1024*1)
```

***NOTE***: 

1. Please do **NOT** add "**u**" behind those constant values. 
2. The STACK_1_SIZE and HEAP_1_SIZE are not in use. You can set their value to reasonable smaller ones if you do want to reduce the RAM footprint. 



### 2.2 How to retarget stdout/stdin

To take advantage of pico-sdk, this template uses bridges to retarget low level functions of stdout/stdin to _read and _write implemented by stdio.c inside pico-sdk.  

```
/*----------------------------------------------------------------------------*
 * bridge the Arm Compiler's stdio and the pico-sdk's stdio                   *
 *----------------------------------------------------------------------------*/
__attribute__((weak))
int stdin_getchar(void)
{
    /*! \note If you don't want to use pico-sdk stdio, then you can implement 
     *!       function by yourself in other c source code. Your scanf will work
     *!       directly.
     *!       by default, we use this function to bridge the _read implemented 
     *!       in stdio.c of pico-sdk
     */
    
    int byte;
    _read(0, (char *)&byte, 1);
    return byte;
}

__attribute__((weak))
int stdout_putchar(int ch)
{
    /*! \note If you don't want to use pico-sdk stdio, then you can implement 
     *!       function by yourself in other c source code. Your printf will work
     *!       directly.
     *!       by default, we use this function to bridge the _write implemented 
     *!       in stdio.c of pico-sdk
     */
    
    return _write(1, (char *)&ch, 1);
}

```

Those bridge functions are decorated as "weak", hence if you want to retarget ***printf/scanf*** directly to a place where you can "***see through***" and/or ***you have total control***, please implement those bridge functions (without delete the weak version) in one of your c source code, for example, sending chars to USART or storing them to a memory block directly. 

**NOTE**: I try to provide you the freedom of choice, and I don't need you to digging deep inside scripts to gain such freedom. 



When using configuration**AC6-DebugInSRAM-printf**, all ***printf*** output is retargeted to '**Debug (printf) Viewer**' inside MDK (as shown below) with the help from EventRecorder.

![image-20220104201854052](documents/Pictures/Debug_printf_Viewer.png) 



### 2.3 How to debug using pico-debug (CMSIS-DAP)

[Pico-debug](https://github.com/majbthrd/pico-debug) is an open-source project which turns one Cortex-M0+ core in RP2040 into a CMSIS-DAP adapter. It means that without an extra one, you can debug a Pico in MDK with just one USB connector. In order to do so, please [download the latest uf2 file](https://github.com/majbthrd/pico-debug/releases) first.



#### 2.3.1 For AC6-DebugInSRAM configuration

Pico-Template provides a dedicated project configuration for downloading and debugging code in SRAM. This is the most convenient one and it delivers the best development experience among the three configurations. To use it, please follow the steps below:

1. Boot the Pico with the BOOTSEL button pressed. 
2. Drag and drop **pico-debug-gimmecache.uf2 **to RPI-RP2 mass-storage driver in the explorer. It immediately reboots as a CMSIS-DAP adapter. Pico-debug loads as a RAM only .uf2 image, meaning that it is never written to flash and doesn't replace existing user code.
3. Open your project which is based on our Pico-Template and switch to ***AC6-DebugInSRAM*** configuration.
4. Compile and Debug
5. Enjoy...

**NOTE: **

**1. In this mode, the "RESET" doesn't really work as we expect. If you do want to RESET, please press the "Reset Pico " button shown below:**

![image-20210919180644156](documents/Pictures/Reset_Pico.png) 

**2. If you cannot find this Toolbox, please start your debug session and go to menu "View"->"Toolbox Window".**

#### 2.3.2 For Other configurations

Besides the project configuration aforementioned, i.e. **DebugInSRAM** , the rest of configurations require users to download the generated uf2 file, i.e. template.uf2, first. To use those configurations, please follow the steps below:

1. Open your project which is based on our Pico-Template and switch to your desired project configuration, e.g. RunInFlash
2. Compile and there should be an generated uf2 file. 
3. Boot the Pico with the BOOTSEL button pressed. 
4. Drag and drop **your generated uf2 file, e.g. template.uf2 **to RPI-RP2 mass-storage driver in the explorer.
5. Boot the Pico with the BOOTSEL button pressed. 
6. Drag and drop **pico-debug-gimmecache.uf2 **to RPI-RP2 mass-storage driver in the explorer. It immediately reboots as a CMSIS-DAP adapter. Pico-debug loads as a RAM only .uf2 image, meaning that it is never written to flash and doesn't replace existing user code.
7. Enjoy...

 **NOTE: For each update of project, you have to go through the steps above from 2 to 6... I guess the step 7 will never happen...**




# Known issue
- Not all peripheral modules are added to the compilation. But I guess it is just a piece of cake for you : P

- ***Please use the elf2uf2 tool in this template*** to convert the generated axf into uf2.

- Might need more documents...

Commit message:

remove submodule perf_counter and use cmsis-pack instead.

README.md, after:

# Pico_Template (v1.6.0)
An MDK template for Raspberry Pi Pico

- Compiler: Arm Compiler 6.15 and above (Using non-intrusive wrapper to support pico-sdk which is written in GCC)
- ***It works as you wanted!***
- Compatible with CMSIS 5.7.0 and CMSIS 5.8.0
- Verified with Arm Compiler 6.15 and above.
- Provide users an option to use the ***stdio*** solution from ***pico-sdk (by default)*** or retarget the ***stdin/stdout*** to a user specified location directly. (See note in ***env_wrapper.c***).
- **Support the latest pico-sdk (v1.3.0)**
- Support Debug in MDK
  - [Using CMSIS-DAP](https://github.com/majbthrd/pico-debug) (Validated in MDK and **highly recommended**)
- Add dedicated project configurations for:
  - [**AC6-flash**] Running code in Flash (XIP)
  - [**AC6-RunInSRAM**] Running code in SRAM (code is still stored in FLASH)
  - [**AC6-DebugInSRAM**] "no_flash" mode in the original pico-sdk. It is suitable for MDK debug.
  - [**AC6-DebugInSRAM-printf**] same as [**AC6-DebugInSRAM**] but retargeting printf to 'Debug (printf) Viewer' inside MDK.




# How to Use

## 1. Get the Pico_Template

I assume that you have the MDK installed on your PC. Please clone the Pico_Template with following command line:

```
mkdir pico-mdk
cd pico-mdk

git clone https://github.com/GorgonMeducer/Pico_Template .

git submodule update --remote --init
```

Instead of using git clone, if you download a release package, then you have to download the [pico-sdk](https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk) manually and put them into the corresponding folder:

| submodules | URL                                     | Directory      |
| ---------- | --------------------------------------- | -------------- |
| pico-sdk   | https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk | ROOT\Pico-sdk\ |

The project template also depends on [perf_counter](https://github.com/GorgonMeducer/perf_counter) which is deployed with a cmsis-pack that you can find in the root folder. 



## 2. Use the Template

The MDK project could be found in the path "ROOT\project\mdk". I assume you know how to use MDK for normal compilation. 

### 2.1 How to set the Stack and Heap size

Usually, people want to adjust the size of stack and heap, and it is very easy in this template. Please find the file "RP2040.sct" in the same MDK project directory. Find the macro ***STACK_0_SIZE*** for stack and ***HEAP_0_SIZE*** for the heap.  



```
#define STACK_0_SIZE        (1024*4)
#define STACK_1_SIZE        (1024*1)

#define HEAP_0_SIZE         (1024*32)
#define HEAP_1_SIZE         (1024*1)
```

***NOTE***: 

1. Please do **NOT** add "**u**" behind those constant values. 
2. The STACK_1_SIZE and HEAP_1_SIZE are not in use. You can set their value to reasonable smaller ones if you do want to reduce the RAM footprint. 



### 2.2 How to retarget stdout/stdin

To take advantage of pico-sdk, this template uses bridges to retarget low level functions of stdout/stdin to _read and _write implemented by stdio.c inside pico-sdk.  

```
/*----------------------------------------------------------------------------*
 * bridge the Arm Compiler's stdio and the pico-sdk's stdio                   *
 *----------------------------------------------------------------------------*/
__attribute__((weak))
int stdin_getchar(void)
{
    /*! \note If you don't want to use pico-sdk stdio, then you can implement 
     *!       function by yourself in other c source code. Your scanf will work
     *!       directly.
     *!       by default, we use this function to bridge the _read implemented 
     *!       in stdio.c of pico-sdk
     */
    
    int byte;
    _read(0, (char *)&byte, 1);
    return byte;
}

__attribute__((weak))
int stdout_putchar(int ch)
{
    /*! \note If you don't want to use pico-sdk stdio, then you can implement 
     *!       function by yourself in other c source code. Your printf will work
     *!       directly.
     *!       by default, we use this function to bridge the _write implemented 
     *!       in stdio.c of pico-sdk
     */
    
    return _write(1, (char *)&ch, 1);
}

```

Those bridge functions are decorated as "weak", hence if you want to retarget ***printf/scanf*** directly to a place where you can "***see through***" and/or ***you have total control***, please implement those bridge functions (without delete the weak version) in one of your c source code, for example, sending chars to USART or storing them to a memory block directly. 

**NOTE**: I try to provide you the freedom of choice, and I don't need you to digging deep inside scripts to gain such freedom. 



When using configuration**AC6-DebugInSRAM-printf**, all ***printf*** output is retargeted to '**Debug (printf) Viewer**' inside MDK (as shown below) with the help from EventRecorder.

![image-20220104201854052](documents/Pictures/Debug_printf_Viewer.png) 



### 2.3 How to debug using pico-debug (CMSIS-DAP)

[Pico-debug](https://github.com/majbthrd/pico-debug) is an open-source project which turns one Cortex-M0+ core in RP2040 into a CMSIS-DAP adapter. It means that without an extra one, you can debug a Pico in MDK with just one USB connector. In order to do so, please [download the latest uf2 file](https://github.com/majbthrd/pico-debug/releases) first.



#### 2.3.1 For AC6-DebugInSRAM configuration

Pico-Template provides a dedicated project configuration for downloading and debugging code in SRAM. This is the most convenient one and it delivers the best development experience among the three configurations. To use it, please follow the steps below:

1. Boot the Pico with the BOOTSEL button pressed. 
2. Drag and drop **pico-debug-gimmecache.uf2 **to RPI-RP2 mass-storage driver in the explorer. It immediately reboots as a CMSIS-DAP adapter. Pico-debug loads as a RAM only .uf2 image, meaning that it is never written to flash and doesn't replace existing user code.
3. Open your project which is based on our Pico-Template and switch to ***AC6-DebugInSRAM*** configuration.
4. Compile and Debug
5. Enjoy...

**NOTE: **

**1. In this mode, the "RESET" doesn't really work as we expect. If you do want to RESET, please press the "Reset Pico " button shown below:**

![image-20210919180644156](documents/Pictures/Reset_Pico.png) 

**2. If you cannot find this Toolbox, please start your debug session and go to menu "View"->"Toolbox Window".**

#### 2.3.2 For Other configurations

Besides the project configuration aforementioned, i.e. **DebugInSRAM** , the rest of configurations require users to download the generated uf2 file, i.e. template.uf2, first. To use those configurations, please follow the steps below:

1. Open your project which is based on our Pico-Template and switch to your desired project configuration, e.g. RunInFlash
2. Compile and there should be an generated uf2 file. 
3. Boot the Pico with the BOOTSEL button pressed. 
4. Drag and drop **your generated uf2 file, e.g. template.uf2 **to RPI-RP2 mass-storage driver in the explorer.
5. Boot the Pico with the BOOTSEL button pressed. 
6. Drag and drop **pico-debug-gimmecache.uf2 **to RPI-RP2 mass-storage driver in the explorer. It immediately reboots as a CMSIS-DAP adapter. Pico-debug loads as a RAM only .uf2 image, meaning that it is never written to flash and doesn't replace existing user code.
7. Enjoy...

 **NOTE: For each update of project, you have to go through the steps above from 2 to 6... I guess the step 7 will never happen...**




# Known issue
- Not all peripheral modules are added to the compilation. But I guess it is just a piece of cake for you : P

- ***Please use the elf2uf2 tool in this template*** to convert the generated axf into uf2.

- Might need more documents...
